Now that we've given an overview
of the concepts of parallelism,
some of the parallels
and frameworks in Java,
and the case studies
we'll be using,
let's start diving into
the first major topic
of the course, which
is Java streams.
In this part of the lesson,
I'll explain the Java streams
structure and functionality,
starting with the fundamentals
of streams.
And then we'll also talk about
the three streams phases, which
we outlined earlier, which
involve splitting, applying,
and combining.
Java streams are a
framework that was first
introduced into the Java
class library in Java 8,
which was in 2014.
And of course, it's been
evolved and improved ever
since that point.
The different versions
of this framework
can be seen in a
number of places.
This book, Modern
Java in Action,
gives you a nice description
of how it's evolved over time.
The links at the
bottom of the slide
here also give you some
examples of new things
have been added
in later versions.
So what is a stream?
A stream is
essentially a pipeline
of so-called
aggregate operations
that process a sequence of
elements, which we sometimes
call values or data.
You can think of an
aggregate operation
as essentially something known
as a higher-order function.
And a higher-order
function is just a function
that applies a function.
And in this case, the
higher-order functions
apply behavior parameters
to every element
that's in a stream
that flows through it.
The use of these
behaviors enables
what's known as behavioral
parameterization, which
helps us to simplify coping
with changing requirements
because we don't have to change
the overall pipeline per se.
We simply change the behaviors
that are passed in in order
to modify what the
pipeline's output will be.
In theory, a stream is
conceptually unbounded.
Although in practice,
it's almost always bounded
by various constraints.
You don't have unlimited
input from files.
input from, say,
a Java collection like an
array list or a hash map.
So instead, you typically
have practical constraints
that bound the amount of
processing that a stream does.
But in theory, it
could run forever.
In fact, we'll show
you some examples
of ways of creating unbounded
streams here shortly.
We're going to use a very
simple case study example
throughout this introduction.
This is actually not one of
the more sophisticated examples
we talked about before.
This particular example
is going to take
a list of the
names of characters
from Shakespeare's play Hamlet.
And it's going to only select
ones whose first letter is
an uppercase or lowercase h.
It will then capitalize the
first letter consistently
and the rest of the
letters consistently.
It will sort them in ascending
order and then print them out.
So that's basically
what this does.
And you can see it's done
with several elements
in a stream that
will give us a chance
to talk about various
aggregate operations.
So let's start by
talking about the three
key phases in a stream.
The first phase is
the split phase,
where you have a source of
data such as what's provided
by an array, as shown here.
As you can see here,
we have an array
of names of characters from the
Hamlet play by Shakespeare--
Horatio, Laertes,
Hamlet, and so on.
And we use the of factory
method on the stream interface
to go ahead and create a
stream of those elements.
Another way to do this is
to create some kind of list.
Here, we'd go ahead
and explicitly create
a list of characters using
the as list factory method
to convert the array of
character names into a list.
And then we say
characters that stream.
So that's a factory method that
creates a stream from a list.
Once we've got the
source of data split up
into the elements in the
stream, the next phase
is the apply phase,
where we process the data
through a pipeline of so-called
intermediate operations.
And there's a bunch of examples
of intermediate operations.
I show some of them here.
As you can see here, we're
going to filter the elements
in the stream to only
allow character names that
start with h.
We will then map those
elements in the stream
to consistently capitalize them.
And then we take the output
of that and we sort it.
You can see here that each of
these intermediate operation
maps an input stream
to an output stream
doing something to the
data-- either filtering
it or transforming it or
sorting it or whatnot.
And then the third and
final phase in a stream
is the combined phase.
And this always
finishes with something
known as a terminal
operation that yields
a non-stream result. So the
main difference between combine
and apply is that these
intermediate operations in
apply take an input stream
and produce an output stream,
whereas the combined phase has
a single terminal operation that
takes a stream and yields
a non-stream result.
As you can see in
this simple example,
the non-stream result is simply
the side effect of printing
every consistently capitalized
character in the play Hamlet
whose first letter is an h.
A terminal operation
does several things.
Most importantly, it
triggers the processing
of the intermediate
operations in the stream
and then will yield
some kind of result.
And we'll talk
about various types
of results we can have later.
Each stream must have one and
only one terminal operation.
We'll talk about this when we
talk later about frequently
made mistakes with streams.
Forgetting to have
a terminal operation
is a classic example of
a commonly made mistake
when you're first learning to
program with the streams model.